[SOMBER MUSIC]
>> I'm sorry if I've
caused her any pain.
You know I haven't
wanted to hurt you.
And I tried so hard.
I tried so hard.
I feel she's here.
She's telling me it's OK.
[GENTLE MUSIC]
>> My name is Joanna Arkell.
I'm 66, and I live in Italy.
I suppose I consider
myself a teacher.
I've taught cooking.
I teach English.
I think I just teach
things that I love.
So I was living quite
happily in Australia.
I had two restaurants there
with a business partner.
We weren't getting on so
well, so I decided to sell up.
And this friend of mine
wanted to go to Italy.
She was passionate about
Italy, about the men, the food,
the language, everything.
And the idea was to
travel all around Europe
and then end up in Italy
and take a language course
for three months, which we did.
And she was hoping to meet the,
you know, the love of her life,
some hot Italian lover.
Now it sort of all
happened to me.
I stayed here, learned
Italian, met my husband,
and been here ever since.
So, you know, now
it's over 30 years.
I got sick when I was very
young with kidney disease.
And my mother also died
when I was very young.
Ultimately, last year, I
had a tube put in my stomach
to start peritoneal dialysis.
And so I've been doing that.
It wasn't easy getting
used to it initially,
but I'm just
feeling much better.
I've had various
sessions with Dr. Allison
Axinn over the years.
It's been very helpful.
So now I'm here
because the same time
that I was having
this tube put into me
for the peritoneal dialysis,
my friend, Dora, died.
And this has been
a friend of mine
now for many years, a very,
very close friend that
was like family for me because
after I separated and then
divorced my husband, I sort of
felt as though I was kicked out
of paradise.
His family had this
wine estate, and we were
living on this wine estate.
And then the marriage breaks up.
And I have this friend,
Dora, who I meet.
And we just became a family--
my son, her daughter,
me, Dora, many years
of Christmases together.
And then suddenly, I'm in
hospital, and she's in hospital.
And she just suddenly dies.
And it's just--
I still haven't come
to terms with it.
And I just feel that I need to
have a session with Dr. Axinn
to just--
I can't accept her death.
I just didn't say
things to her that I
feel that I just wanted to say.
And it's just torn me apart.
You know, there's
pain there as well
because I don't feel as though
I told her how much I really
cared for her.
I just feel as though I need
some help with understanding.
You don't realize how
much you love somebody
until they're gone.
[RHYTHMIC MUSIC]
>> My name is Professor
Allison Lee Axinn,
and I live in
Pietrasanta, Italy.
I am a Life Between Lives
practitioner and instructor.
Life Between Lives
therapy is a technique
where you are
coming into a place
where you are able
to see your life
from an objective viewpoint.
So you're able to look at
your traumas, your situation,
your problem and put
them in a perspective.
My original degree was in
psychology and philosophy.
And along the way,
I took degrees
at other places, New York
University, Columbia University.
At a certain point,
my eldest sister,
who was studying
astrology, invited me
to her astrology class.
And I went to her class
not believing in astrology.
There was a person who led us
to past lives spontaneously.
And I had what is called the
cinematic experience-- visual,
deep, profound, life-changing.
But at that point,
I just sort of
thought it was a very
creative experience,
and I didn't trust how
easily people sort of did it.
You know, close your
eyes, take a breath.
You're in the forest.
I didn't realize how we
can travel in the mind.
I still kept-- on my way,
had a period working in film,
did different things, worked
at a museum of modern art,
and then ended up getting a
degree to teach at university,
and ended up moving overseas to
a little tiny town in Italy that
is a marble-carving area.
And at a certain
point, I thought,
I don't want to keep
teaching university.
I want to help people.
And I became a
practitioner, and I
began to see it was
much more effective
and useful as a
therapeutic tool.
It is a powerful tool.
It's very sacred.
It requires huge trust, and
it is a massive responsibility
to help someone connect
to their unconscious mind.
You need to be trained
for if anything comes up.
You need to be trained for
how to help someone, know
how to integrate it.
It is a therapy that you want to
reinforce your clients' autonomy
and independence.
And it's a tool
where you can even
come back to that same story
and use it again and again.
When people come here,
something magical happens.
For me as a therapist, it's
the perfect place to work.
There's a saying here that the
marble is going to talk to you.
You're going to bring
out the sculpture that
already exists in the stone.
For the kind of work I'm
doing, it's the perfect place
to be because there is this
defining the contours of who you
are and how you exist in
this amazing thing that
is our human bodies
to exist in the world,
to understand the shape of who
the artwork of ourselves is.
In this work, what's amazing
is the sense of continuity
because you can do a session
that can be life-changing,
and then you may come
back and work on something
completely different.
And yet there are links
between one session to another,
so you build a kind of base.
And so Joanna, who
I've worked with,
has a particular issue that came
up that she wanted to work with.
Hi.
>> Hi.
>> So how are you feeling?
>> Pretty good overall.
But, you know, as we've
spoken on the phone,
I just felt that I needed
to come and see you again.
And enough time passed since
the death of my friend, Dora.
And it's just still a lot of
grief going on, which you know,
obviously.
It was such an important
friendship for me.
It was a family.
>> It was--
>> We created this
family together.
So it was-- it wasn't like
that my best friend type
of friendship.
It was just-- it was more
like a family, you know?
All the problematics
of a family, you know?
>> Yeah, I know.
>> Sometimes she would drive me
insane, crazy, and, you know.
Such an intimate
friend in that sense.
I've always wanted family.
>> And as you've spoken
to me about before,
you had come to Italy
and created family.
>> Yeah.
And then we created this
sort of second family.
And then that's gone.
And it seems to be
a pattern, you know?
Childhood, losing my
mother when I was young,
and the breakup of the family,
and then my father remarrying.
So I was always searching
for this family.
>> Yeah.
>> A longing for the family.
You know, I've not been ever
ambitious on the outside world,
but I could say my ambition
is being in a family.
>> Ambition was, yeah.
>> To be important, have an
important role in the family.
>> So when you have an
important role in the family,
what does that feel like?
>> I've got purpose.
>> You've got a purpose?
>> Yes.
This is what I'm all about.
This is my life.
I've got this role.
>> Yeah.
>> Big mother or whatever,
cooking in the family.
>> Cooking in the family,
being in the family,
fighting in the family.
>> Yes, whatever.
>> Uh-huh.
>> You know, just being
present to the family.
>> Your family moved to
Australia when you were young.
>> When I was very young.
>> And then you came over here.
>> Yeah, when I was about 29.
I came over here.
>> How does family look to you?
>> For someone who would like
to do Sunday lunch every Sunday.
>> Yes.
It looks like
Italian Sunday lunch.
>> You know, living alone, I
don't have this big family that
I always dreamed of.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, obviously, there's
learning about the inner
journey, the inner family.
>> So the inner journey,
the inner family?
>> Yeah.
Maybe just needing to
connect more with that,
like on a deep soul level that
I'm connected to it, you know,
not that it's just me speaking
on this psychological level.
>> Mm, such as just your human
soul, personality speaking,
but there's something deeper,
more profound with that linked
to the inner, higher self.
Yeah, yeah.
Are there any other things
that are important or relevant?
You know how pretalk goes.
We mention the things.
Then when we're in
session, whatever
comes up your higher mind's
guided us towards, but just
to have a list.
Yeah.
>> I think that's sort
of the crux of it.
Yeah.
>> And how are you feeling
in this second right now,
in this moment?
>> Curious.
>> Curious?
>> To know what's
going to happen.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
>> What are you feeling
or sensing right now?
>> It's a little wooden house,
like a children's house somehow.
>> Uh-huh.
>> It's isolated.
>> It's isolated?
>> It's a bit dark.
>> And how does that make you
feel to be in this isolated,
a bit dark?
>> It's sort of got that
atmosphere of like a fairy tale.
And I don't know.
There's something a
bit ominous about it.
I don't know.
I just keep thinking something
like Hansel and Gretel.
In the very beginning,
it was fine.
But then it just, this
atmosphere took over,
and I was-- sort of started
absorbing the atmosphere.
And it was-- there's something
ominous, something not OK here.
It's not quite what I--
I'd hoped for or
expected or something.
>> What did you expect?
>> Something brighter,
more sunshine, more happy.
>> OK.
So here, she's
expressing expectation.
No matter how much we
try, even as therapists,
we can't get away
from expectations.
So for me, that she
was disappointed
was brilliant because it
meant we could work with it.
>> There's something
about abandonment there,
and I feel abandoned.
It's not the sunshine
that I wanted.
>> So now that you know
this, what happens now?
>> Find people or
go somewhere else.
>> Mm-hmm.
So you have to find people
or go somewhere else?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Uh-huh.
And what do you do now to go
somewhere else or find people?
>> I'm going to the beach.
>> You're going to the beach?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> OK.
She wasn't comfortable
where she was,
so I realized she needed
to go somewhere else.
So I offered different
possibilities
of what she could do.
>> So then she asks me if I
wanted to go somewhere else.
And I shoom out like a shot.
>> How does it feel to
arrive to the beach?
>> It's good.
I just remember a
photo of my mother
and me sitting on the beach.
I don't have any memory of it.
I just have a photo, but I'm
really feeling loved by her.
You know it makes me very happy.
So I think she was
really happy then too.
My mother died when I was
12, and I don't really
have memories of her hugging me
and really feeling loved by her.
It was just like this period
before we went to Australia.
And I felt as though it
was all sort of light.
You know I feel as though
they were sort of light years
before the darkness came.
I didn't have a burden
somehow to feel weighed down.
>> You didn't feel weighed down?
You didn't have a burden?
>> All this was in England
and before we immigrated
to Australia.
I remember it was a big
secret, and my father
told me this secret.
And I was only
sort of about four.
>> It was a big secret?
>> That we were going to
go to live in Australia,
but I couldn't tell anybody.
>> Uh-huh.
>> My father tells
me, this is a secret.
You mustn't tell
anyone, but we're
going to go and
emigrate to Australia.
What I took on then is
his fear, his doubts.
God, if he's scared
about this big journey
that we're going to
take, what about me?
And then we went to Australia.
And then we didn't
have any family.
Nobody.
Didn't know anybody.
And I think it was that
first sort of setting up
that pattern for
me of being cut off
from roots and
family and my mother
then being sick in
Australia and the change.
I think it sort of then
became the dark years
you know with the family.
I can't remember her sort of
ever kissing me or affection.
You know I've always sort of
thought of it more as my mother
died, but it was really that--
>> Moving to Australia
and keeping the secret,
it being a secret even?
>> Yeah.
>> I think 'cause I
was just very young,
I haven't ever felt the
emotional impact of that on me.
>> Yeah.
She steps into this
revelation about her father
where she suddenly
understands it's not
just that she was
keeping a secret
but that she was picking up on
all of his own emotional fauna
and his fears.
And this for her was very
overwhelming and frightening,
which then led to her
basic theme, which
is the theme of losing the
family, of grief, of not having
what she needs, of
being disappointed.
>> Just seems like
too much emotion.
>> There's too much emotion?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And what happens when
there's too much emotion?
>> I have to tune out.
>> Uh-huh.
You have to tune out when
there's too much emotion.
And when you tune
out, where do you go?
What do you do?
>> I sleep.
>> You sleep?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Uh-huh.
And when you sleep,
what happens?
>> Then I can go and
dream and go anywhere.
>> That's one of her themes,
is that she is very influenced
by other people's emotions,
and it can be overwhelming.
She uses sleep to
regenerate her body.
become more clear.
And she uses it also to heal.
>> Feels just like
going to the stars,
just going out into nothingness.
Space.
>> So you're added to
the stars and to space.
>> Mm-hmm.
Ultimate freedom.
It's like this limitlessness,
this feeling of one
with whatever is but you
haven't got all of this drama.
It's just free.
It's flying free.
It's dissolving now.
I just feel as though I'm
coming back into sleep.
>> And how does that feel?
>> In my body now, not in this--
>> Yeah, in the space.
>> In that space of
being with no body.
Would it be useful to
go further back in time?
Or is there anywhere else
you need to go first?
What's happening now?
>> No, I was just
thinking of Dora again,
just something about--
you know, when you say, is there
anything else, any other place
you need to go, I just
immediately thought,
I don't know.
>> Uh-huh.
And so--
>> Just Dora.
>> Yeah.
So if you need to go to Dora,
let's see what happens, OK?
>> Mm-hmm.
I'm sorry if I've
caused her any pain.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Or if any of my
actions have hurt her or--
it just weighs on me that--
I haven't wanted
to hurt you or--
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And I tried so
hard, I tried so hard.
>> Yeah, you tried so hard.
>> [SNIFFLES]
I just have felt
this remorse that we
couldn't clear up a couple of
misunderstandings that we had.
And I felt that there was a
little bit of lack of trust
and that we hadn't gone into it.
And then she just very
suddenly, abruptly dies.
I feel she's here.
>> You feel she's there?
>> She's telling me it's OK.
>> Instead of me saving her,
instead of thinking of solutions
to make her feel better,
Dora came on her own.
And for me, that was
extremely important
because it wasn't
something contrived.
It was natural.
Take all the time you need.
>> She said it's all OK.
>> Mm-hmm.
So she's speaking with you?
>> The OK-ness was that I could
just see her totally OK and big
smile and happy and certainly
not holding on to something like
I am.
No, I felt my heart warm.
>> You felt your heart warm?
>> Mm-hmm.
No, I'm not--
she's not here now.
I don't feel that she's--
but when she was here, I
felt it go to my heart.
And she told me she loved me.
She never told me that before.
>> She never told you?
>> I told her that I loved her,
but she'd never said it to me.
>> She'd never said it to you?
And now she has.
Dora says to her, I love you.
Now you have to
remember, her mother
never expressed
emotion and affection.
And she speaks about this.
Dora was her dear friend.
It was a brilliant friendship.
But she had said I
love you to Dora.
Dora never said I love you back.
We know that Dora
said it was OK.
And that immediately shifted
something in her body.
Her whole body, if
you really study it,
relaxed because she's been
carrying this as a tension,
because this has
been massive for her.
Is there any place you need to
go now or anyone you need to see
or something you need to do?
>> I don't know.
I think maybe I need to connect
to some guide or something
to help me.
>> Yeah.
And if you are connecting to
your guide, where do you go?
>> This woman has shown up.
I don't know her.
>> This woman showing up,
and you don't know her?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Why don't you ask
her why she's come?
>> She says I can call her Mama.
>> How does that feel
to call her Mama?
>> She's very funny.
>> And how does it
feel to be with her?
>> Very nice.
>> She deepens into this
connection of feeling this Mama
figure, which we don't want to
romanticize the session before
it's begun, but we've
already understood that Mama
in childhood did not
give her all she needed.
So as a result, here's Mama
right now in this moment.
>> Now we go for
a walk together.
>> And as you're
walking together,
what is the terrain like?
>> It's a forest.
Feels very secure with her.
It's quite dark.
>> But you feel very secure?
Is that right?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> In the beginning,
the session starts off,
and she's not as deep.
And she goes into this Hansel
and Gretel creepy kind of place
and chooses to go away.
Mama's taking her
through the same terrain,
and she's feeling it's creepy
and scary, only it's OK.
And are you walking alongside
Mama or behind or in front?
>> No, I stopped to talk.
Yeah, she's telling me
to take care of myself,
first and foremost.
>> Wondering if you might
ask her about your hands.
>> I've got this arthritis that
just in the past few months,
this winter, it seemed
to have got worse.
You know, it was just
one of the things
that we had talked about
that possibly could come up.
There's something about an
overidentification with doing.
I'm always using my hands to
do something, do it for others
or, you know--
It's that resolve
every problem by doing.
>> What can you
understand from that?
>> Well, if I'm not doing,
I don't feel my life's worth
living.
I have to do for others because
that makes me feel good.
That gives me purpose.
Something about
the arthritis being
about resentment, about the
doing because sometimes you
don't want to do or
I don't want to do,
but I feel as though I
have to because then I
feel useful and needed.
And that's also with
the family, 'cause then
I feel a useful
member of the family.
You know that my life
has purpose and meaning
and makes me feel good.
You know that like the
trade-off for me is recognition.
The payback is that
they recognize me.
Yes, you're wonderful.
You're doing whatever.
And then if they
don't, I get resentful.
Arthritis is the resentment
and the anger around the doing.
>> She was saying,
I'm not appreciated.
I get angry because
I feel I'm trying
to please people and help
people and serve people
because I want to belong.
I want to feel my right
to be allowed to be here.
In her mind, she's
working hard to be loved.
>> She's saying that I need
to recognize those qualities.
You don't need it
from the outside.
If I validate
myself, then I'm not
looking to others to validate
me by doing something for them.
>> I'm wondering why Mama came,
if there's a particular purpose
that it was her.
>> She's like a
big protectress--
>> Mm-hmm.
>> --type.
She's this sort of
archetypal mother
that's larger-than-life
type mother.
>> So you've got a mother now.
>> Yeah.
You know, she feels like
a part of me, a part of me
that I can call on to mother me.
It's sort of like
she was just slipping
inside of a little part of me
or something, this type of--
like just connecting with that--
>> Yeah.
>> --energy in me.
It's like she entered in.
I could just feel it sort of
entering into my head here.
Then it sort of just
became, yeah, she's there.
I can mother myself.
This is like an
archetype that's in me.
It's just a joy of being
'cause there's not--
yeah, there's not the
identification with mother.
I think that's the lesson
for me, being and expressing
your love, really,
that's all she's doing.
You know that I'm putting onto
her this sort of big mother
that she appears to me,
but it's not really--
the energy is really
just living love.
>> Mm-hmm.
And so the lesson
for you is it's not
the identifying with the role.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> It's the essence of being.
It's almost like I can say
I've been on a mother journey
all my life, all trying to
make up for some sort of a loss
and then fitting into this
role of being a mother
but often not mothering myself.
>> There was the focus
of grief and the loss.
And then you understand
that this sole contact
with that friend was
also about coming
to the massive healing
that goes all the way back
through an entire lifetime.
In the search for trying
to heal or come to a peace
or understand more
about this loss,
it touched her
entire life where she
could open the door to see
one of the original sources.
So how are you doing?
>> OK.
>> Just breathing
into your body.
I think this work makes
the world a better place.
And the whole point
is that we should all
be allies in supporting
each other to do this, which
is why, as therapist and client,
it's great because this is all
coming from the client.
I'm just holding the space.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]
>> It's been two weeks
since my session.
And I feel peaceful
because I came
to some resolution regarding
the death of my friend, Dora.
This dialogue that I was
able to have with her
during this session, it
resolved these misunderstandings
that we had.
I felt as though I
could say things to her
and that she was responding.
And there was nothing
left unsaid now.
It had all been said.
Whereas I was holding
on to this anxiety
almost about things that
had been left unsaid.
You always got to say
everything to people.
You've got to express.
Don't leave unspoken words.
It doesn't change your
grief, but I have more peace
around the grief.
And of course, I'm very
grateful to Allison,
who, through her, has
given me this opportunity
to have more peace and have
deeper contact with myself.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]